‘Incapable of a true word’: Gantz lashes Netanyahu for claim he risked troops’ lives
Defense minister erupts at former PM during interview; opposition leader problematically encourages people to vote at polling stations for the disabled if far from home

Leader of the National Unity party Benny Gantz castigated opposition leader Benjamin Netanyahu in an angry outburst on the eve of Israel’s elections, calling the former prime minister a “liar” who “is incapable of saying a single true word,” and who “is endangering the State of Israel” by offering extremists power.

On Monday afternoon, Netanyahu said in an interview with Army Radio that Gantz was not a potential political partner and accused the current defense minister of “endangering the lives of Golani soldiers in order not to hurt Palestinians” when he served as the chief of staff of the Israel Defense Forces.

Netanyahu identified Gantz as “a leftist who said he was proud of endangering the lives of Golani soldiers in order not to hurt Palestinians.” The opposition leader was referring to an incident during Operation Protective Edge in 2014, in which the military waited for Palestinian civilians to evacuate before destroying a target in the Gaza Strip.

Netanyahu’s comments led to an unprecedented attack by Gantz.

Interviewed on the same radio station immediately after Netanyahu, Gantz accused the former prime minister of lying and said his political rival and one-time partner would put the State of Israel at risk if returned to office as premier.

“We were in northern Gaza. And we had to take down a hospital [from which enemy forces were operating] and make sure [first] that there were no patients and other people who had to be evacuated,” Gantz said of the incident, stressing that Netanyahu, prime minister at the time, knew all the details.

“We completed all the procedures while waiting with [our forces] undercover, and then I destroyed the hospital. But Bibi, that liar, is incapable of saying a single true word. So I’m telling you, [his account of what happened] is not true,” Gantz exclaimed, referring to Netanyahu by his nickname.

He added that Netanyahu was “endangering the State of Israel” by promising extremists like leaders of the far-right Religious Zionism party, Bezalel Smotrich and Itamar Ben Gvir, more power if he manages to return to the premiership, and questioned their ability to handle senior positions in the defense establishment.

Earlier on Monday, Netanyahu said Ben Gvir was a viable candidate for public security minister if his bloc was successful in forming a government after Tuesday’s elections. Ben Gvir was not drafted for military service because of his extremist history.

Last week, Smotrich said he hoped to be defense minister in the next government. “My service prepared me more than many other things,” he told the Ynet news site, despite having no combat experience.

Meanwhile, Netanyahu on Monday problematically urged voters to use booths intended for the disabled in case they cannot reach their designated booths.

“If you can’t make it to your voting booth, you can vote at a disabled booth,” Netanyahu tweeted. “Don’t stay home!” he added, attaching a list of the special booths and their locations.

Israeli citizens are required to vote at their assigned polling station that corresponds with their official residential address, but people with disabilities are allowed to vote in special booths located outside their formal residential areas if one is not located close enough to them.

Anyone can vote at an accessible polling station after signing a declaration saying they cannot reach their assigned polling station due to “limited mobility.” In principle, doing so without justifiable cause is an offense punishable by up to a year of imprisonment. But in practice, the matter is not pursued.

In a plea to “all Israelis — right-wing, left-wing, Likud members and Yesh Atid members,” Prime Minister Yair Lapid said Monday that “everyone deserves the most basic thing — a government made of decent and hard-working people.”

In his statement, Lapid said he never believed “that Israel is divided into ‘us’ and ‘them.’ We all love the country, we’re all patriots and Zionists and want to live here together.”

“I call out to voters who have not voted for me in the past and ask you for the opportunity to work together,” he added.