
Summary for jerusalem_article1.txt:
From serious parties advocating for minorities to the more outlandish factions, such as the Pirate Party, here are some of the lesser-known groups running in the Knesset elections.
But a total of 39 parties are running in the race for the 21st Knesset election, most of which will not cross the 3.25% threshold.
Established in 2013, the Na Nach party is comprised of followers of the late Rabbi Yisroel Dov Ber Odesser, a charismatic Israeli hassidic leader who passed away in 1994.
A joint list of two parties, the first is translated as "All Israel are Brothers" and advocates for Jewish-Ethiopians.


Summary for jerusalem_article10.txt:



Summary for jerusalem_article2.txt:
“First they called us tchah-tchahim, then they called us riffraff, mezuzah-kissers, and now they call us bots,” has been Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s refrain since the news report about a supposed social media network of fake accounts supporting him and the Likud was published on Monday.
The most famous incident is former prime minister – and the first from the Likud – Menachem Begin’s “Tchach-tchachim Speech.”
“I’ll admit to you, until this morning, I never heard the word ‘tchah-tchahim,’ and I didn’t know what it meant,” Begin said, as eventual Likud minister and fighter against anti-Mizrahi racism David Levy laughed behind him, and the crowd chanted Begin’s name.
The Likud’s immediate response has been to highlight those people who came forward as the “bots,” and to accuse the opposing camp – which includes the press, since Netanyahu has long painted much of the media as leftist – of dehumanizing Likud voters.


Summary for jerusalem_article3.txt:
With a new song, Tamer Nafar urges Arab turnout: 'if our vote will erase Liberman, imprison Bibi, then we're ready'
Tamer Nafar has an answer for all those who don’t want to vote.”
“If our vote can help send Bibi to prison and to get Liberman out of the Knesset, then it’s already worth voting,” Nafar said in a statement Thursday.


Summary for jerusalem_article4.txt:



Summary for jerusalem_article5.txt:
In the same appearance last week, Shaked complained of “mishpatizatzia” (over-legalization) of IDF conduct in dealing with conflict with the Palestinians.
Earlier in election season, Shaked avoided answering questions about whether Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s attempt to fire his office’s legal adviser should change her view that legal advisers should become political appointments.
However, when Blue and White leader Benny Gantz made one of his first public appearances in the election season calling for an amendment to the Jewish Nation-State Law to secure the Druze community’s special status, Shaked was one of the first to lash out and attack him as left-wing.


Summary for jerusalem_article6.txt:
Yahad, which was only ever a political tool for Yishai to return to the Knesset after he stormed out of Shas in 2014, was consistently polling at under 1% of likely votes, giving the party no chance whatsoever of entering the Knesset.
Acknowledging at least that his party would not cross the electoral threshold, Yishai said he was ending Yahad’s campaign and instructing supporters to vote for UTJ, so as not to waste votes that could go to religious and right-wing parties and endanger the right-wing bloc as a whole.


Summary for jerusalem_article7.txt:
“Other parties know the Netanyahu era is over,” Gantz said.
Likud Minister Yuval Steinitz, who is close to Netanyahu, said in a cultural event in Petah Tikva on Saturday that he believes Netanyahu will form the government, that Gantz will ask to be Netanyahu’s defense minister, and that the Likud “will consider all of our options.”


Summary for jerusalem_article8.txt:
A conspiracy theory in the style of Wag the Dog began to be floated in news outlets of varying levels of respectability – like the UK’s Independent – and on the social media accounts of anti-Israel organizations that Netanyahu wants a war, because it’ll somehow help him ahead of the April 9 election.
They claimed that Netanyahu intentionally sparks wars right before elections to help him win.
“History shows a terrible pattern of Netanyahu heightening violence right before Israeli elections,” Jewish progressive group IfNotNow tweeted.
First, the dry facts: the only wars – really operations – that have taken place while Netanyahu was in power were Pillar of Defense in 2012 and Protective Edge in 2014.


Summary for jerusalem_article9.txt:



Summary for times_article1.txt:
Overall, right-wing and religious parties received 66 seats in the poll, versus 54 for the center-left and Arab parties, mirroring the results of all major surveys released in recent days and again suggesting that Netanyahu will have an easier route to building a governing majority.


Summary for times_article10.txt:
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told members of his Likud party that President Reuven Rivlin “is just looking for an excuse” to task rival Benny Gantz with forming a government after upcoming elections, in a recording aired Tuesday night by Israeli television.
In the recording, which Channel 12 said was made earlier Tuesday at Likud headquarters, Netanyahu urged supporters to head to the polls on April 9, warning a large enough seat advantage for Gantz’s Blue and White could prevent Likud from forming the next government.


Summary for times_article2.txt:
Polling well behind Blue and White and Likud, in third place, was the opposition Labor Party with 10 seats, followed by Hadash-Ta’al and United Torah Judaism with seven seats apiece.
In total, Blue and White, along with center-left and Arab parties, would receive 56 seats, versus 64 for Likud with the right-wing and ultra-Orthodox parties.


Summary for times_article3.txt:
A television poll aired Tuesday projected Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud as the largest party in Knesset elections on April 9, with some support for Benny Gantz’s Blue and White flowing to a resurgent Labor Party.


Summary for times_article4.txt:
The simple, agonizing question for voters Tuesday: Is Netanyahu good for Israel?
All of which and more might explain why, according to our notoriously unreliable opinion polls, Netanyahu appears well-placed to win Israel’s elections on Tuesday — possibly as the head of the biggest party, and emphatically as the politician best able to cobble together a multi-party majority coalition.
In the narrative with which he has governed and fought elections — most especially this one — Netanyahu and those who vote for him are strong, clear-eyed, Zionist patriots, while his political rivals are weak, confused appeasers, siding with Israel’s enemies in pursuing an illegal witch hunt in order to remove him
In the narrative with which he has governed and fought elections — most especially this one — Netanyahu and those who vote for him are strong, clear-eyed, Zionist patriots, while his political rivals are weak, confused appeasers, siding with Israel’s enemies in pursuing an illegal witch hunt in order to remove him.
To a large extent, in a country where politics has direct life-and-death implications for the citizenry — where the choice of government can determine the size of the country, its population mix, and the frequency with which its conscript children must risk their lives to defend it — Tuesday’s poll is about one question: Is Netanyahu good for Israel?


Summary for times_article5.txt:
Pre-election poll by Israel Democracy Institute finds a quarter of Israelis fear election cheating, Arabs much less likely to follow election news than Jews
Incumbent prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu is Israelis’ preferred candidate for premier over rival Benny Gantz, but not by much, a pre-election survey by the Israel Democracy Institute has found.
Just 38% (45% of Jews and 9% of Arabs) believe Netanyahu.


Summary for times_article6.txt:
Flatly ruling out Palestinian statehood, which he said would “endanger our existence,” Netanyahu promised to permanently maintain overall Israeli security control in the West Bank and to formalize Israeli rule over the 400,000-plus Israeli Jews in the settlements.
If the Palestinian Authority, as expected, rejects the Trump proposal, and Netanyahu says yes to it with certain reservations, Netanyahu believes Trump “would give him backing and legitimization to annex or extend Israeli law to all West Bank settlements or at least some of the blocs,” the TV report said.
When asked if he expected the US administration to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the West Bank like Trump recognized the Golan Heights last month, and why he wasn’t pressing Trump now to approve Israeli sovereignty over the settlements, Netanyahu said: “Wait until the next term.”


Summary for times_article7.txt:
“Successive Israeli governments have ostracized the Arab population,” Sondos Saleh, a candidate for the Hadash-Taal alliance of Arab parties, told a group of around 100 supporters in the old city of Acre recently.
He spoke of three categories of non-voters: those who have always refused to vote because they see Israel as an “occupying and colonial state”; those who decry the lack of achievements by Arab MPs; and those frustrated by recent laws they view as discriminatory.
“According to the nationality law we passed, Israel is the nation-state of the Jewish people — and only it,” he wrote on Instagram, though added that Arabs have equal rights.


Summary for times_article8.txt:
A poll published Wednesday showed all right-wing parties crossing the electoral threshold, giving Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu a possible 67-seat bloc after the April 9 elections.
According to the Haaretz poll, Netanyahu’s Likud party would receive 30 seats, beating rival Benny Gantz’s Blue and White party who would win just 27.


Summary for times_article9.txt:
But if I’m honest, my desire for political stability in Israel is tainted by selfishness: I’m one of thousands of Israelis living abroad who, in every election, must fly home on short notice with high costs because our country won’t let us vote anywhere else.
Whereas the United States, France, the Netherlands and many other democracies actively encourage expats to participate in elections – expats even have their own constituencies and representatives in the French parliament’s lower house – Israel bars its about half a million citizens living elsewhere from voting abroad.
Maximillian Marco Katz, an Israeli citizen and activist against anti-Semitism in his native Romania, said he wouldn’t make a special trip to vote there, although he will for Israel.
Torn and undecided about whom to vote for, Katz says Netanyahu has “elevated Israel to new heights in terms of its international status, economy and security, but neglected vital internal issues like health, socioeconomic gaps and education.”
“I basically make a point of participating in every election where I am eligible to vote,” said Beck, a dual citizen of Austria and Israel.
Israel does not.” (Austria allows voting by mail.

