
Summary for jerusalem_article1.txt:
The head of the Joint List of Arab parties, Odeh has indicated that under the right conditions he would recommend to President Reuven Rivlin that Blue and White leader Benny Gantz form a government.
The head of the Joint List of Arab parties, Odeh has indicated that under the right conditions he would recommend to President Reuven Rivlin that Blue and White leader Benny Gantz form a government and even consider joining a Center-Left coalition under his leadership.
“There is not a single prime minister who has incited against Arabs as much as Netanyahu,” Odeh said.
Odeh said, however, that he does not view the prime minister’s tactics as just “cynical” or even “racist,” but, rather, he believes Netanyahu knows “that he is in trouble” and “he is not thinking about the day after the election, he is only thinking about the election.”
The Arab leader said he is hopeful that, come September 17, “Netanyahu will be the one crying.” Odeh believes that if he can generate enough excitement and boost Arab turnout, it could be enough to topple Netanyahu.
“I want to be Ayman Odeh, a person who makes a real contribution to peace, equality and democracy and brings Jews and Arabs closer together,” Odeh told the Post.


Summary for jerusalem_article10.txt:
The international community, after protesting the Israeli move for annexation, will within a short number of years fall in line behind the Palestinians and support democracy, one person one vote, and the de-Zionification of the State of Israel.
For those Israelis who continue to believe that partition is probably the only road to peace with the Palestinian people, and to the Palestinian citizens of Israel who must understand that they hold the keys to defeating Netanyahu, full participation in the election that must dump Netanyahu is the only avenue for saving us and the State of Israel.
Palestinians would have to be insane to continue the charade of Oslo and two states after Netanyahu will annex vast parts of what they believe should be their state.
No, Mr. Netanyahu, Israel that annexes huge parts of the West Bank is no longer the democratic nation-state of the Jewish people.
Those of us in Israel who have supported and struggled to bring about a two-state solution are now forced to accept the new reality that you will create, and we will have to join the ranks of the Palestinian people who will fight for democracy and equality in a non-nation-non-ethnic-secular state.


Summary for jerusalem_article2.txt:
A message sent by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s Facebook page called on voters to avoid a left-wing government of “Arabs who want to destroy us all – women, children and men – and allow a nuclear Iran that will kill us,” reported Maariv.
"The message from the Facebook page of the prime minister that says it is 'forbidden that there will stand a left-wing government that relies on Arabs that want to destroy us all' is a racist statement against a fifth of the citizens of the state, the Palestinians who are citizens of Israel, and brings racism and incitement against an entire sector of the population of the country."


Summary for jerusalem_article3.txt:
Sources close to Netanyahu said that Israel keeping the Jordan Valley is in Trump’s plan.
Blue and White reacted to Netanyahu’s statement by sarcastically praising Netanyahu for “adopting Blue and White’s plan for recognizing the Jordan Valley.” The party accused Netanyahu of having a plan to give up the Jordan Valley in 2014.
Even before Netanyahu’s address, the head of the Jordan Valley Council released a statement thanking the prime minister “for the historic decision.”
Yamina candidate Naftali Bennett said Netanyahu needs to take action to annex the Jordan Valley, not just talk.


Summary for jerusalem_article4.txt:
Before the announcement, Judge Melcer declined a joint request by Blue & White and the Democratic Union to ban the broadcast completely which claimed it would be political propaganda.


Summary for jerusalem_article5.txt:
Ben-Gvir said his party will cross the threshold, and will “enable the Likud to build a right-wing block of 61 MKs.” Otzma warned that Netanyahu will form a unity government with Blue and White if Otzma does not cross the threshold.


Summary for jerusalem_article6.txt:
Polls currently forecast only five to seven seats for the Democratic Union, but in an interview with The Jerusalem Post at a café in Jaffa, she says she has no regrets.
People who care about their democracy need to come and vote and participate, like Irish people from around the world did [in May 2018] when there was a referendum for abortions to be legal.
[Netanyahu] wants an Erdogan-like regime.
Trust me, the Democratic Union will be the new democratic party of Israel.
You think Netanyahu will take apart Israeli democracy completely?
But neither Blue and White nor Likud want your party in a coalition, so what impact could you have?
The Likud also says it doesn’t want Blue and White, so maybe Blue and White’s strategy is wrong.
We don’t want a right-wing coalition, and they shouldn’t either.
Why don’t you say, like Blue and White and Labor, that a coalition with the Likud is OK as long as Netanyahu leaves?
We established the democratic party of Israel.


Summary for jerusalem_article7.txt:
"We tell Netanyahu, and whoever follows him, you will not break the Palestinians' will, you will never break our will, never, never," said Hassan Al-Abedi, a 55-year-old farmer who lives in the village of Jiftlik.


Summary for jerusalem_article8.txt:
Alongside promises of eternal salvation in return for a political vote, ultra-Orthodox parties invoke spectre of war on the religious to boost voting numbers
Thus spoke Rabbi Shalom Cohen, president of the Council of Torah Sages of the Sephardi, ultra-Orthodox Shas party on Saturday, once again turning voting into a religious obligation upon which your soul will be judged in the afterlife.


Summary for jerusalem_article9.txt:
A two-state outcome between Israelis and Palestinians is not possible any time soon.
When two states is no longer part of the political discourse, when one state is the only outcome that is discussed, it will not be long before the Palestinians – even if they cannot agree on anything else – will create a new mantra: “One person, one vote.” And, no one should kid themselves.
Continuing to build outside the areas will soon create a tipping point, and once passed, the ability to separate Israeli and Palestinian populations will be lost.
So does preserving separation as an option so that the Palestinians can’t simply adopt a slogan of one person, one vote that will resonate and do far more for the de-legitimization movement against Israel than BDS ever could.


Summary for times_article1.txt:
In a campaign speech billed by his Likud party as a “dramatic announcement,” Netanyahu also repeated his vow from before elections in April to extend sovereignty to West Bank settlements, but said he would do so with “maximum coordination” with the United States.
“There is one place where we can apply Israeli sovereignty immediately after the elections,” Netanyahu said, speaking with a map of the Jordan Valley on an easel next to him.
According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, some 4,391 Palestinians live in 47 unrecognized villages located within the area on the map where Netanyahu said Israel would apply sovereignty.
“This is a historic chance, a one-time window of opportunity, to apply Israeli sovereignty over our communities in Judea and Samaria and also additional areas with great importance to our security, heritage and future,” he said.


Summary for times_article10.txt:
Naftali Bennett is the chairman of the New Right party, not Yamina leader Ayelet Shaked, as the two have led the public to believe, Zman Yisrael, the Hebrew sister site of The Times of Israel, revealed on Tuesday.
Ahead of the second vote this year, set for September 17 after Netanyahu failed to form a coalition, New Right joined forces with Jewish Home and the National Union to form the Yamina alliance and, in an attempt to broaden voter appeal, named Shaked – a controversial but very popular politician – as its leader.
However, a review of the New Right’s party bylaws reveals that Bennett has remained New Right chairman, despite Shaked being publicly presented as its leader throughout the campaign and being placed at No. 1 on Yamina’s Knesset slate.
As New Right’s chairman, Bennett maintains the authority to split the party from Yamina after the elections, potentially leaving Shaked with no Knesset faction to head.
At a press conference Shaked and Bennett held last week alongside three senior officials from Moshe Feiglin — the Zehut party leader, who officially endorsed Yamina after deciding to bow out of the race — the two were asked if the New Right plans on splitting from Yamina.


Summary for times_article2.txt:
Crucially, the polls point to an electorate — battered by Gaza rocket fire, still traumatized by Second Intifada Palestinian terrorism of the early 2000s, wary of Hezbollah and its nuclear-aspiring state sponsor Iran — that has deepened its faith in Benjamin Netanyahu, even as the prime minister has moved steadily to the right and battered away at key pillars of Israel’s democracy.
A curious mix of political hawks utterly mistrustful of the Palestinians (such as former Likud defense minister Moshe Ya’alon), relative doves (notably from its Yesh Atid component, whose leader Yair Lapid supports a two-state solution in principle) and political unknowns, it fared just well enough in April, with the unexpected assistance of Yisrael Beytenu’s Avigdor Liberman, to deprive Netanyahu of the 61 seats he needed to form a new coalition.
So, too, is Netanyahu the prime minister who liked to place himself and Likud at the center of his coalitions, flanked by parties to right and left.
Gantz has argued that Netanyahu’s voter fraud allegations are designed so that if the prime minister loses on Tuesday, he will claim that the elections were unfair, and the results are unacceptable — a charge that Netanyahu has waved away, declaring himself outraged and aggrieved at the very idea.


Summary for times_article3.txt:
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s push last week for significant military action in the Gaza Strip after a rocket fired from the territory forced him to take cover was reportedly forcefully opposed by top defense officials.
Mandelblit then told the prime minister he would have to consult the security cabinet before launching a military operation that could start a war, causing Netanyahu to shelve the plan, the Haaretz daily reported earlier Monday.


Summary for times_article4.txt:
Some Arab voters say they’ll back Blue and White to defeat Netanyahu, while Jewish supporters of Arab parties see their votes as necessary to stop ‘the antidemocratic current’
On a summer evening in this northern Israeli city, candidates of the centrist Blue and White alliance led by former army chief Benny Gantz are seeking the votes of the Arab minority who make up nearly a fifth of Israel’s population.
“I am not voting for them because they are Arabs,” he said, referring to the Joint List.


Summary for times_article5.txt:
“There probably won’t be a choice but to launch an operation, a war with the terror forces in Gaza,” the prime minister said in a radio interview with the Kan public broadcaster, kicking off a media blitz five days before the national elections.
“We have a situation in which a terror group that launches rockets has taken over, and doesn’t rein in rogue factions even when it wants to,” Netanyahu said of the Hamas terror group, which has ruled the Strip since it took over in a bloody coup in 2007, and which openly seeks Israel’s destruction.
“Israel’s citizens know very well that I act responsibly and reasonably, and we will start an operation at the right time, which I will determine,” said Netanyahu, who is also defense minister.
Netanyahu distanced himself from a campaign message on his Facebook chatbot that said “Arabs want to annihilate us all,” saying it was a mistake by a campaign employee and stressing: “I have friends in Arab countries and have respect for any person.”


Summary for times_article6.txt:
“This time, we will be partners in the government,” read a large banner for the Democratic Camp party, featuring the smiling face of Issawi Frej, an Arab Israeli Knesset member from Kafr Qassem who is number 6 on its list.
“The more votes for the Joint List, the less for the right-wing,” one said.
“The more votes for the Joint List, the higher our status,” said another.
“A high turnout of Arab and Jewish [non-right-wing] voters could ensure that the Otzma Yehudit party does not enter the Knesset,” she said, referring to the extreme-right Kahanist party.
Arik Rudnitzky, an expert in Arab Israeli politics, said that fewer Arab Israelis voted in the April elections to object to the dissolution of the Joint List, which served together in the Knesset’s previous term, as well as to protest Israeli policies such as the nation-state law.
“If we [Arab Israelis] vote, we will be able to block Netanyahu from forming a government,” he declared.
“We want equality for Jews and Arabs,” she said.” I don’t want Netanyahu because I don’t want racism in government.
According to the nation-state law we passed, Israel is the nation-state of the Jewish people — and not anyone else.” He also courted controversy on election day in 2015 when he published a video urging right-wingers to vote because Arab Israelis were “flocking” to the polls.
Afif Abu Much, a political activist from Baqa al-Gharbiya, said that in his opinion, there are some 250,000-300,000 Arab Israeli voters who would never vote for the Arab-majority parties, but said left-wing and centrist Zionist parties have failed to win many of them over.
If Blue and White wants Arabs to vote for its list, it needs to put Muslim and Christian representatives on it.”


Summary for times_article7.txt:
Right-wing Jews said behind billboards calling on Arabs not to vote
“Someone called me, a Jew with an American accent, and he says to me, ‘I want to do a campaign among the Arabs to boycott the election, to encourage Arabs to boycott the vote,” the company’s owner told Channel 12.
He said he wants as few Arabs as possible to vote.”


Summary for times_article8.txt:
A PR firm behind the Likud operation later boasted on Facebook of what it said was an operation to place cameras in Arab polling places to keep the vote clean.
The veteran premier warned on election day in 2015 that Israeli Arabs were voting in “droves,” a comment for which he later apologized.
This week, a chatbot on Netanyahu’s Facebook account that said Arabs “want to destroy us all.”
Zaher said an Israeli law approved last year declaring the country the nation-state of the Jewish people has discouraged Arabs from voting.


Summary for times_article9.txt:
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s national security adviser, Meir Ben-Shabbat, met with the head of the Central Elections Committee last week to warn him that Tuesday’s elections could be delayed due to an imminent war in the Gaza Strip, according to the Haaretz daily.
According to the latest report, the prospects of a possible military response in Gaza became so serious that Ben-Shabbat invited the head of the Central Elections Committee, Hanan Melcer, to attend a meeting of top security officials and Netanyahu.

