
Summary for jerusalem_article1.txt:
According to Cohen, the Left hates Netanyahu for killing the two-state solution, and for causing the assassination of he who bore the message of this solution – Yitzhak Rabin.
While it is true that the Left views Netanyahu as an enemy of the two-state solution, and accuses him of responsibility for much of the anti-Rabin incitement leading up to November 4, 1995, these are certainly not the reasons why the Left hates or detests Netanyahu.
Since then Netanyahu hasn’t lost an opportunity to speak disparagingly of the Left – “Hasmol,” with a hissing s, or “small,” equating it with weakness and treasonous conduct, and accusing it of loving Palestinians while hating religious Jews.
As a proud left-winger I take all this very personally, and my criticism of this man – the democratically elected prime minister of my state – has progressively turned into disgust and detestation.


Summary for jerusalem_article10.txt:
Monday marked day two of a second round of public jousting between Acting Justice Minister Amir Ohana and Attorney-General Avichai Mandelblit, over filling the role of state attorney.
Ohana’s round one candidate, Orly Ben-Ari Ginsburg, was viewed by Mandelblit as being unable to manage the entire country’s prosecution apparatus and as two levels below a line of candidates who would usually be the pool from where the state attorney would come from.


Summary for jerusalem_article2.txt:
Like the two previous elections, Netanyahu has made himself once again the focus of this election.
On March 17 the bribery trial of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu will begin and Israel will find itself in a situation it has never been in and never should’ve been in: a sitting Prime Minister standing trial for grave corruption charges.


Summary for jerusalem_article3.txt:
Sanders, who has been critical of the right-wing leader's policy towards Palestinians, described Netanyahu as "a reactionary racist who is now running" Israel.


Summary for jerusalem_article4.txt:
"I hope that they decide to give up dreams, illusions," Gantz said of the Palestinian Authority.
In an interview ahead of the Israeli general election to be held on Monday, Gantz said that the Israeli government needed to make a decision between two disparate options: either "total calm" by bringing home the soldiers who are being held in Gaza, "or we need to go to a militarily decisive campaign," he said.


Summary for jerusalem_article5.txt:
The first election, in April 2019, ended with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud Party getting the most votes.
This guide outlines the big questions that next week’s election will answer, breaking down how Israel’s government is constructed; why Israelis are going to the polls again; and who’s competing for power in the next government.
Israel’s election is a free-for-all: Instead of two major parties, there are 29 parties competing at the ballot box.
The more votes a party gets, the more seats it has in Israel’s 120-seat parliament, the Knesset.
Polls show that eight parties are likely to win Knesset seats in next week’s election, though there are usually surprises.
Likud, Israel’s right-wing flagship and Netanyahu’s party, supports annexation of parts of the West Bank and encourages privatization in the economy.
The Joint List is a union of four disparate Arab-Israeli parties that advocates for that minority’s rights in Israel, as well as Palestinian statehood.
In the 2015 elections, the Netanyahu-led Likud won 30 seats and formed a coalition with smaller right-wing and religious parties.
In the April election, Blue and White fought Netanyahu’s Likud to a tie, with each party winning 35 seats in the 120-seat Knesset.
On the other hand, the September election was revolutionary — because of Israel’s lone Arab party, the Joint List.
Arab-Israeli parties have never been part of Israeli governing coalitions and are usually at odds with both the Israeli Jewish left and right.
But in September, the Joint List won 13 seats, tying its record from 2015 and becoming Israel’s third-largest political party.
And then it did something rare: Most of the Joint List, which is an alliance of four smaller factions, endorsed Gantz, the former general and head of the centrist Blue and White party, to be the next Israeli prime minister.
Ahead of that vote, the four Arab-Israeli parties  and became Israel’s third largest party, as well as a symbol of opposition to the right-wing government.
Jumping ahead to next week’s election, the Joint List hopes to remain Israel’s third-largest political party.
And despite the Joint List backing Gantz in September, Arab-Israeli parties have never been part of an Israeli government.
Could this election result in a first-ever coalition that includes an Arab party?


Summary for jerusalem_article6.txt:
Netanyahu delivered what could have finally been that game changer on Tuesday night when he challenged Gantz to a debate.
Why could debating Netanyahu have been a game changer for Gantz?


Summary for jerusalem_article7.txt:
“The right-wing parties collaborate because they are in power, but strategically, they have not advanced one centimeter in the past 52 years, they have only regressed, and it is mainly the right-wing governments’ fault because the more they talk the less they do,” says Hendel, who believes that while movements such as the Sovereignty Movement hold conferences on the idea of sovereignty, in reality, in every election they support those who do not really intend to apply Israeli law.
Hendel’s remarks are indeed resolute, although they contradict the resolute statement of another member of his party, MK Ofer Shelah, who states “The annexation of the Jordan Valley has not been and will not be part of Blue and White’s platform.” We request Hendel to resolve this contradiction and to this end he refers us to the party’s head, Benny Gantz.
“When Benny Gantz says that he will develop the Jordan Valley and turn Ma’ale Ephraim into an urban center and that we will double the number of farms, this is not idle talk.” “What is beautiful about this party is that a third of its voters are right-wing, a third is left-wing and a third is in the center and this can also be seen its members of Knesset as well.


Summary for jerusalem_article8.txt:
Currently, in the midst of the election season and  with the possibility that the political window of opportunity will close if the Trump era is over by the end of the current year, the discourse on sovereignty over the Jordan Valley is becoming the key discourse in the political and diplomatic sphere, but already more than three years ago, MK Sharren Haskel (of the Likud) proposed legislation to apply Israeli law over this area.
In her proposed legislation, Member of Knesset Haskel detailed the process of sovereignty in the Jordan Valley and northern Samaria in a number of key phases.
In order to try to promote the process even during this complex period of the absence of a permanent government, Haskel has tried to take advantage of the opportunity provided by MK Avi Nisenkoren, head of the Knesset Arrangements Committee in the transitional Knesset, to seek an exemption from the obligation to present MK (Yisrael Beytenu) Oded Furer’s law formally, and requested the same exemption to shorten the legislative process with her proposed legislation for Israeli sovereignty over the Jordan Valley as well, but “when Nisenkoren saw that it was our request, he stalled Furer's request as well and stopped the discussion that was scheduled for the next morning.”


Summary for jerusalem_article9.txt:
“There was a direct line for advice between us [Ben-Gvir and Shaked] regarding the appointment of judges and other positions in the legal system,” he said at the conference.


Summary for times_article1.txt:
Netanyahu has also claimed that one of Gantz’s most popular party colleagues, Gabi Ashkenazi, has previously made horrible remarks about the Druze community, and repeated his long-term assertion, firmly denied by Gantz, that Blue and White would partner with the majority Arab Joint List if necessary to form a Knesset majority.
Gantz is not a suspect in the probe, but that has not stopped Netanyahu asserting that the investigation will culminate in a veritable “earthquake,” and the affair has plainly complicated a key thrust of the Blue and White campaign — that Gantz is Mr. Clean to Netanyahu’s Mr. Corrupt.
In three rapid-fire election campaigns, relatively few Israelis have been moving across the political spectrum, from Netanyahu’s right-Orthodox bloc to Gantz’s center-left, or vice versa.


Summary for times_article10.txt:
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his Likud party have launched an effort in the last days of their reelection campaign to reach out to Arab Israelis.
Netanyahu and his Likud party’s effort to lobby Arab voters has also included criticism of the Joint List, an alliance of the four largest Arab-majority parties in Israel.
“The whole point of Netanyahu’s campaign focused on the Arab community is to lower Arab voter turnout,” Shbita said in an interview.
The Joint List has pushed back against Netanyahu’s campaign targeting Arab voters, arguing that it will not redeem him for his past rhetoric.


Summary for times_article2.txt:
After Gantz on Monday repeated his pledge to make Ashkenazi defense chief if Blue and White wins next week’s Knesset elections, Netanyahu attacked Ashkenazi over transcripts — currently barred from publication by a court gag order — of the latter’s phone calls with Avichai Mandelblit, now the attorney general, related to the decade-old “Harpaz affair.”
During a Tuesday campaign rally in Migdal Haemek, Netanyahu called the pledge to make Ashkenazi defense minister “an empty promise, because when the recordings are published Ashkenazi won’t be able to be defense minister and in my opinion will quit politics.
Despite Likud accusing Ashkenazi of lying, Interior Minister Aryeh Deri confirmed Tuesday in an interview with the Walla news site that he had indeed offered Ashkenazi the defense portfolio during the negotiations — on behalf of Netanyahu.


Summary for times_article3.txt:
The law calling that third election within a year — the only piece of legislation passed by the short-lived parliament — increased state funding for political parties’ campaigns by some NIS 61 million ($18 million), with each party receiving a raise of around 34 percent.
Unable to directly increase the sum of the funding unit set by the public committee, MKs nonetheless found a way to give themselves a raise for the March 2020 election by introducing a temporary amendment to the Political Parties Financing Law that multiplied the number of seats previously won and projected to be won by 1.31 in order to establish the number of “funding units” each party received.
According to Shapira’s calculations based on current projections, whereas the total state funding for parties in the September 2019 election stood at NIS 178,435,000 (some $50 million), this election will put NIS 239,304,381 (nearly $70 million) in the parties’ coffers, an increase of NIS 60,869,381.


Summary for times_article4.txt:
When Arab Israeli politician Ayman Odeh arrived at Café Edmond in Tel Aviv, he had one objective in mind: to make sure that not only Arab voters “stream in great numbers to the polls,” as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu wrote in a contentious Facebook message on the eve of the 2015 elections, but that Jewish leftists do so as well — and put a Joint List slip into the ballot box.
It wasn’t easy for the Joint List to support Gantz, who had begun his campaign by boasting of 1,400 Palestinians killed in Gaza, said Odeh.
Now, though, instead of embracing the Joint List and commending it for its brave step, the Blue and White leader “speaks of a Jewish majority,” Odeh complained.
Let him say, as clearly as possible, that we are a legitimate group, being natives, being citizens, being elected public representatives, and we want to influence events,” said Odeh.
My parents have also supported Hadash since I was born, and as time goes on I believe in the Hadash way more and more,” Odeh said.
It’s the entire Joint List alliance — and many potential Jewish voters recoil at the words of Balad’s terrorist-supporting female MK Heba Yazbak, feel threatened when they see Palestinian flags at protests, and can’t vote for a party of which some members oppose LGBTQ rights.
Citing a harsh racist hegemony in Israel, Odeh said it’s unacceptable to treat Balad as “a bunch of lepers” and “extremists you can’t deal with” simply because the party “supports Israel being a state for all its citizens.” He further said that there is no comparison between “people fighting to establish a Palestinian state and who recognize the Jewish people’s right to self-determination” and Smotrich, who Odeh said “does not recognize the rights of the Palestinian people.”


Summary for times_article5.txt:
Lapid: It’s either ‘Bibi and his liars’ or Gantz, who ‘everyone knows is honest’
Dismissing any equation between Netanyahu’s imminent graft trial and a new probe into a firm Gantz chaired, Blue and White No. 2 says he truly believes his party can win next week
On Sunday night, for the first time in months, two opinion polls placed Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud party ahead of Benny Gantz and Lapid’s Blue and White, albeit without predicting any significant change in the deadlock between the rival right-Orthodox and center-left blocs.
On Monday evening, Blue and White marked the first anniversary of its foundation — the merging of Lapid’s established Yesh Atid party with former Likud defense minister Moshe Ya’alon’s nascent Telem and ex-IDF chief Gantz’s new Israel Resilience Party into a partnership of substantial political diversity unified mostly in the cause of seeking to oust Netanyahu.
Part of its appeal has stemmed from the fact that Gantz, Ya’alon and Gabi Ashkenazi, who form the party’s leadership quartet with Lapid, are former IDF chiefs — able to challenge Netanyahu’s Mr. Security credentials.
I mean, there’s only one person who’s preventing us from having a unity government and it’s Bibi, and his indictment.
We have said many times that for us, Liberman and Likud are the two first phone calls we’re going to make in order to form a government.
We’re not going to do what Bibi and his people do, which is attack the investigators because they don’t like the results.
Everybody in his right mind looks at this and says, Okay, we might have criticism of Benny Gantz, but we know he is an honest broker, he’s an honest guy, a guy who’s dedicated his life [to Israel].
Everybody in his right mind looks at this and says, Okay, we might have criticism of Benny Gantz, but we know he is an honest broker, he’s an honest guy, a guy who’s dedicated his life [to Israel].
B, since we’re discussing a direct attack on Israeli democracy, we also have to remember that democracy — I’m not talking about the Greek ancient democracy, but the way we know it — is a new, fragile idea, that not everybody looks at as the natural course of things or the natural way of ruling.
I think it’s a good thing.
I think it’s part of the creation of a governing party.
We have banned ourselves from doing the same — meaning, we moved into the ring with shackles on our legs just by the fact that we insist on, you know, weird things like telling the truth and not smearing people using false allegations.
You know, Red Ocean, Blue Ocean — it’s a business theory saying if you are creating a new business, try to go to a blue ocean.
So we [in Blue and White] are in a blue ocean — of being in politics, yet truthful and value-oriented and telling things the way we really see them, not manipulating people.
When we started, Bibi used to tell people in interviews that we’re going to collapse within days, that [Blue and White] is on the brink of falling apart.
You cannot say of a party, three of whose four leaders are former IDF chiefs, that we will not deal with security, especially when the results Gantz and “Bogie” [Ya’alon] and Gabi [Ashkenazi] had in Gaza were much better than Bibi’s.
Our version: A group of people who know how to work together, who feel like a team, who understand that friendship and the ability to cooperate are an advantage to a prime minister, not a disadvantage the way Bibi sees it… A team with a leader we can trust because he’s truthful, honest, and I know it doesn’t sound like much, but it is to me, a great guy.
You cannot just take the pages you like because it’s election time and you need this as an election stunt.
And if we are the largest party, and the president says, I’m only going to give it to one party this time.
He doesn’t have to let two parties have a try: Blue and White is going to try and form a government, and if it can’t we’re going to another election, to a fourth election.
If it’s really obvious that nobody is going to have a majority, why would he give two parties the chance?
He has been saying it, he put up a billboard saying, Blue and White is going to go into government with the Joint List.


Summary for times_article6.txt:
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his main rival Benny Gantz, head of the Blue and White party, ripped into each other on Saturday, each calling the other unfit to lead the country as Israelis head back to the polls on Monday for the third time in under a year.
Netanyahu said Gantz can’t form a coalition without the support of the Joint List and that such a government would be “dangerous” for Israel.” He further claimed that Blue and White voters who understand this were “coming over to the Likud.”
The prime minister also called Gantz a “mediocre” chief of staff — his “third choice” for the role — and said he now heads “a dictatorial party.”
Gantz specified that he would not seek to build a coalition with the support of the mainly Arab Joint List and said he backed a unity government with Likud, but only without Netanyahu.
Liberman said Saturday that Netanyahu “has lost control, and Gantz has not yet learned to lead.”


Summary for times_article7.txt:
Six former security chiefs warned Israelis against keeping Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in office, describing him as a danger, stating that he is putting the country at risk and using sensitive classified information for personal gain, in a video published online Thursday.


Summary for times_article8.txt:
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced on Tuesday that he had ordered the promotion of a plan for some 3,500 homes in a contentious West Bank area that has long been frozen due to objections from governments around the world supportive of a two-state solution.
The project Netanyahu referred to actually comprises two plans north of Ma’ale Adumim totaling 3,426 homes that were prepared by the government of former prime minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1994 and advanced through an early planning stage called “deposit” in 2004 by the Civil Administration, the Defense Ministry body responsible for authorizing settlement construction.


Summary for times_article9.txt:
Israel Bachar says his boss ‘doesn’t have the courage to attack Iran’; Blue and White dismisses report as part of Likud-made ‘industry of lies’

