
Summary for jerusalem_article1.txt:
When they were sworn in as ministers, both Tropper and Hendel had high hopes that the new government would be a unifying force for the country during the coronavirus pandemic and could help heal rifts inside Israeli society.
When Hendel left Blue and White for prime ministerial hopeful Gideon Sa’ar’s New Hope Party, shortly after the government fell apart in December, Gantz fired him from his post as communications minister.
Hendel said that if Blue and White crosses the threshold, the party would be a good coalition partner in the government he believes will be formed by Sa’ar.


Summary for jerusalem_article10.txt:
Following pressure from Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Religious Zionist Party leader Bezalel Smotrich reached an agreement with far-right Otzma Yehudit leader Itamar Ben-Gvir on Wednesday night to run together in the March 23 election.
“We are maximizing the potential for a right-wing government to be formed after the election,” Smotrich’s party said.


Summary for jerusalem_article2.txt:
One week prior to the election in September 2019, in a speech broadcast live on Israel’s main TV channels, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu declared, “Today I announce my intention, after the establishment of a new government, to apply Israeli sovereignty to the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead Sea,” calling the area “Israel’s eastern border”.
Just like before every election in Israel, failed or new would-be leaders emerge to start new political parties.
Following a long period away from politics, he started the New Hope Party to challenge for the country’s leadership.
Another of today’s main players in Israel’s forthcoming election is Naftali Bennett, who heads the Yamina Party.
Therefore, I am running for prime minister to finally bring that change, so Israel will have leadership that sees its citizens and not itself.”
For the new election, no definitive policy statement for Benny Gantz’s Resilience Party has been issued.


Summary for jerusalem_article3.txt:
In an attempt to find out the true positions of the political parties vying for the vote of the public, The Jerusalem Post sent a series of questions to all the major Jewish parties, asking them about their positions on conversion, civil marriage, ultra-Orthodox conscription into the IDF, and public transport on Shabbat.
The Likud declined to answer the Post’s specific question about supporting or opposing legislation to revoke the High Court decision which the ultra-Orthodox parties say they will introduce and demand as part of their coalition agreement in the next government.
In response to the Post’s question about supporting the ultra-Orthodox law, the party said opaquely that it would “always stand for laws that serve the broadest possible public in a spirit of compromise and would not encourage divisiveness or discrimination of any kind.”
Party leader Bezalel Smotrich described the High Court ruling as “dangerous to the future of the State of Israel as a Jewish state,” and said the court was “brazenly trampling the Jewish identity” of the country.
Both ultra-Orthodox parties are strongly opposed to civil marriage, seeing it as a religious problem which legitimizes Jewish intermarriage and which would create problematic Jewish personal status issues.
The two parties’ MKs voted against civil marriage legislation in the last Knesset.
The party fully favors the establishment of civil marriage in Israel and proposed legislation in the last Knesset to create such an option, which was defeated by the coalition.
The party strongly supports civil marriage and voted for such legislation which came before the last Knesset
The 34th government of Israel, led by Netanyahu and the Likud from 2015 to 2020, gutted the law for universal Jewish conscription passed at the behest of Yesh Atid in 2014 during the 33rd government, and reinstated blanket IDF service exemptions for ultra-Orthodox yeshiva students.
Following the collapse of the 33rd government of Israel, Netanyahu said that the universal conscription law had been passed “against my opinion,” and allowed the haredi parties to pass their amendment reversing the earlier legislation.
The Defense Ministry drafted legislation for increasing ultra-Orthodox conscription into the IDF when party leader Avigdor Liberman was defense minister in the 34th government of Israel.
The party manifesto states that it will pass legislation creating a Basic Law determining that Torah study is a “foundational value,” therefore preventing the High Court from striking down blanket exemptions from IDF service for ultra-Orthodox yeshiva students.


Summary for jerusalem_article4.txt:
The Channel 13 survey, taken by pollster Camil Fuchs, predicted 29 seats for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud, 20 for Yesh Atid, 11 for Yamina and only nine for Sa’ar’s party.


Summary for jerusalem_article5.txt:
It would be a “strategic liability” for Israel if Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu remains in power, due to his poor relations with the Democratic Party on the Iranian issue, Labor Party leader Merav Michaeli said Tuesday in an event for English speakers in Israel sponsored by The Jerusalem Post and the Tel Aviv International Salon.
Michaeli called Netanyahu “hypocritical” for instructing Likud representatives on the Central Elections Committee to oppose disqualifying two anti-Zionist Arab parties after voting in favor of preventing Labor’s seventh candidate, Ibtisam Mara’ana, from running.


Summary for jerusalem_article6.txt:
“I HAVE a road map to set egos aside and form a right-wing government,” he says, before making reference to the formula considered the world’s most guarded secret.
“There are three things mainstream Israelis want,” Bennett says.
“I need 15 seats, which would be the critical mass needed to be able to form a government,” Bennett says.
“I am used to that from Netanyahu,” he says.
“He was always against the communities in Judea and Samaria and wrote that the government’s money can be found between Yitzhar and Itamar,” Bennett says.
But Bennett saves his fiercest criticism for the theory being advanced in Haaretz and other media outlets that his secret goal is to join not only Netanyahu’s government but also his Likud Party as the prime minister’s heir apparent.
“I would manage things like I did as defense minister in the first wave of the coronavirus, with creativity, rapid decision-making, and serious work,” he says.
“I asked to be health minister,” Bennett recalls.
“We have to build an independent capability to stop Iran, while working very closely with America,” he says.
“I want Ayelet Shaked to choose them, not passive, weak people like the Likud has had over the years,” he says.


Summary for jerusalem_article7.txt:
Since then, the parties have done the expected mudslinging against their rivals, with every party aiming at Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, and Gideon Sa’ar and Naftali Bennett fighting each other more and more intensely.
But the election could end up being decided not at the top of the polls but at the bottom, where Meretz, Blue and White, the Religious Zionist Party and United Arab List (Ra’am) are fighting for their political lives and Labor could soon join them.
The guide includes the candidates, poll numbers and strategies of every party that crossed the threshold in the past week’s polls.
The guide also includes Anglo candidates, as defined by their parties, and English websites if the parties have them.
Strategy: Presenting Lapid as a clean and professional alternative to Netanyahu, who will form a “sane government” and end political chaos.
Strategy: Presenting Sa’ar as the candidate most fit to succeed Netanyahu and bring about unity and stability.
Strategy: Presenting Bennett as the true professional who can bring about a more efficient government focusing on the needs of the people, especially in the fight against the health and economic crises caused by the coronavirus.
Strategy: Presenting the need for Arabs to get out the vote to maximize the power of the Joint List in the next Knesset.
Strategy: Presenting Netanyahu as weak against the haredim and failing at stopping the coronavirus, using the slogan “Liberman: Ending the rule of the haredim.”
Strategy: Using the betrayals by other parties in the past three elections to remind voters on the Left that Meretz is the only safe vote for those who do not want to continue to empower Netanyahu.


Summary for jerusalem_article8.txt:
Former defense minister Moshe Ya’alon announced  on Monday that he will not be seeking a seat in the next Knesset and that his Telem Party would not run in the March 23 election.
But Ya’alon declined Yesh Atid leader Yair Lapid’s offer to join his party and instead tried to have Telem run independently.


Summary for jerusalem_article9.txt:
Ra’am (United Arab List), a conservative Muslim party made up of the southern branch of the Islamic Movement, decided last week to leave the Joint List after the other parties refused two ultimatums to vote together against LGBTQ issues, and to be able to have greater freedom to vote with the Right.


Summary for times_article1.txt:
Election arrangements include 38 polling stations in COVID-19 wards, and hundreds of special stations — including drive-through facilities — for people who are sick or quarantined
This isn’t the first time that Israel is running polling stations for people quarantined at home.


Summary for times_article10.txt:
Yesh Atid leader Yair Lapid on Monday dismissed Yamina chair Naftali Bennett’s pledge that he would not support a government headed by Lapid, saying that if the anti-Netanyahu bloc receives a majority of seats in the election “we will come out of it with a government.”
Since being left out of the government Netanyahu formed last year with the Blue and White party, Bennett has become a vocal critic of the prime minister’s handling of the COVID-19 pandemic but — unlike other rivals of the premier — has not ruled out joining a Likud-led government after the elections.


Summary for times_article2.txt:
A day before national elections, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Monday attended a cornerstone-laying ceremony for a new neighborhood in a West Bank settlement and said his Likud party supports the legalization of unrecognized outposts.
“We support the regulation of the young settlement movement communities,” Netanyahu said at the ceremony in Revava, employing terminology used by pro-settler groups for outposts.


Summary for times_article3.txt:
Israel has held national leadership elections every 2.3 years on average – more frequently than Greece (2.5 years), Spain (3), Japan (3), Canada (3.2), the United Kingdom (3.8), and Italy (4.4), among others.


Summary for times_article4.txt:
New Hope party chief Gideon Sa’ar on Monday refused to rule out joining a government led by Opposition Leader Yair Lapid, keeping the door open to a coalition to replace Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that includes right-wing, centrist and left-wing parties.
Sa’ar’s remarks came after Yamina leader Naftali Bennett, another right-wing challenger to Netanyahu, pledged not to sit in a government headed — solely or via a power-sharing agreement — by Lapid, who heads the centrist Yesh Atid party.


Summary for times_article5.txt:
A man was arrested and taken for questioning on suspicion of planning to murder Yesh Atid party chairman Yair Lapid, police said Monday.
Police said the suspect from the city of Beit Shemesh posted threats against Lapid online that said he will murder the opposition leader even if he is jailed for it.


Summary for times_article6.txt:
Netanyahu, who has served as prime minister for the past 12 years, hopes voters will reward him for leading the country’s successful coronavirus vaccine rollout and his diplomatic outreach to the Arab world.
Netanyahu has staked his re-election hopes on the success of Israel’s successful vaccination campaign.
Netanyahu’s religious and nationalist allies tend to have highly motivated voters.
If one of the anti-Netanyahu parties fails to get in, a strong showing by the Religious Zionists would likely put Netanyahu over the top.
Despite the tight race, neither Netanyahu and his religious and hardline allies, nor the anti-Netanyahu bloc, led by Yair Lapid’s centrist Yesh Atid party, are expected to capture a majority of seats on their own.
Given their similar world views, Bennett, who has served as Netanyahu’s education minister and also defense minister, appears to be better suited to join Netanyahu than to join the anti-Netanyahu bloc, which ranges from dovish Arab parties to former Netanyahu allies who have had bitter personal breakups with him.


Summary for times_article7.txt:
Knesset Guard, Shin Bet, other services reportedly practice securing parliament from violent protesters on or after election day, in bid to avoid local version of US Capitol riots
The Knesset Guard and security agencies are reportedly preparing for a scenario in which masses try to storm the parliament building during or after Tuesday’s national election, in what would mirror the scenes in January at the US Capitol after Donald Trump lost the presidential election there.
The network said a special operations room is being set up at the Knesset by the police, the Shin Bet security service and the state prosecution to monitor potentially violent or inflammatory events akin to those that preceded the Capitol riots.
While protesters did not try to break into parliament, some did climb on a sculpture of a menorah and a Star of David in a traffic circle just outside the Knesset that is within the Guards’ grounds, including a young female social worker who took off her shirt while atop the menorah.


Summary for times_article8.txt:
If Netanyahu wins on Tuesday, by contrast, his coalition will be spearheaded by his own Likud — nowadays largely opposed to any substantive effort at negotiation with and separation from the Palestinians, overwhelmingly supportive of laws to roll back the powers of Israel’s judiciary, and unswervingly personally loyal to Netanyahu himself.
Naftali Bennett says he supports legislation that would protect a serving prime minister from prosecution, but also that he opposes retroactive legislation — and thus would oppose a legislative effort to extricate Netanyahu from his legal woes.
But since Bennett has shown himself highly susceptible to pressure from Netanyahu in the run-up to election day — on Sunday night going so far as signing, live on TV, a pledge not to join a coalition led by Yair Lapid — one wonders how resistant he would prove to pressure from Netanyahu if he is serving, say, as Israel’s minister of defense and deputy prime minister.
A Netanyahu win on Tuesday, given the limited array and orientation of his potential political partners, poses a new risk to Israel’s democratic character — the danger that its separation of powers, the balance of responsibility between the judiciary, the legislature and the government, will be recalibrated, and checks and balances weakened, under a prime minister with the most direct personal interest in defanging the courts.


Summary for times_article9.txt:
Settlement factory’s Palestinian workers print Israel’s election ballots

