
Summary for jerusalem_article1.txt:
How could Lapid or Gantz attempt to form a government if Netanyahu fails to?
Even without 61 seats, this likely will still be opposition leader and Likud head Benjamin Netanyahu, since Prime Minister Yair Lapid is not expected to receive the recommendation of the Arab parties.
The mandate will then likely go to Lapid, who will receive another 28 days to attempt to garner the necessary 61 votes to form a government.
The only remaining option other than heading to a sixth election would be if a majority of MKs vote to give the mandate to form a government to someone else – presumably Defense Minister Benny Gantz.
Still, facing the sixth election and with Lapid expected to continue indefinitely as interim prime minister, MKs and parties may be willing to make significant concessions.


Summary for jerusalem_article10.txt:
"I am not comparing this to anything, but Hitler also rose to power in a democratic manner," the Foreign and Defense Committee head said when asked about the prospect of a government led by Netanyahu and radical right-wing MKs Bezalel Smotrich and Itamar Ben-Gvir.
In Ramat Hasharon, National Unity MK Sharren Haskel claimed her party head, Defense Minister Benny Gantz, will convince the haredi (ultra-Orthodox) and Likud MKs to defect from Netanyahu's bloc and form an alternative government.


Summary for jerusalem_article2.txt:
With polls indicating that the far-right is grabbing more and more votes, racist extremists may get critical portfolios – including that of defense.
Politicians have claimed that the government under Prime Minister Yair Lapid and Defense Minister Benny Gantz has “failed” Israelis and that terror has run rampant under their leadership.
While Palestinian terrorism has risen significantly, so has Jewish terrorism at the hands of far-right settlers, who openly support Ben-Gvir and Smotrich as they attack Palestinians and even IDF troops.
Whoever ends up assuming the defense portfolio will also be working with the IDF’s new Chief of Staff Hertzi Halevy.


Summary for jerusalem_article3.txt:
Israel election: Will rainy weather wash away the Arab vote?


Summary for jerusalem_article4.txt:
The anti-Netanyahu bloc is made up of Prime Minister Yair Lapid’s Yesh Atid; the National Unity Party led by Defense Minister Benny Gantz; Avigdor Liberman’s Yisrael Beitenu; the two left-wing parties, Meretz and Labor; and the United Arab List led by Mansour Abbas.
The polls predict 59 or 60 seats for the pro-Netanyahu bloc – one or two seats short of a majority in the 120-seat Knesset; 56 or 57 seats for the anti-Netanyahu camp; and the remaining four seats likely to go to the Hadash-Ta’al Arab party.
Whereas Lapid has refrained from ruling out the option of forming a government that would rely on support from Ahmad Tibi and Ayman Odeh from outside the coalition, Gantz pledged not to form a government with Hadash-Ta’al, saying that the National Unity Party would not join any such government, even if it were to be formed by Yair Lapid.
The most significant trend during the election campaign has been the surge in support for the radical Itamar Ben-Gvir, head of the far-right Otzma Yehudit (Jewish Strength) and number two on the Religious Zionist Party list.
Ben-Gvir responded by accusing Netanyahu of preferring to form a broad government with Benny Gantz over one with him, despite statements to the contrary.
Gantz believes he will be able to attract haredi and possibly some Likud MKs to a coalition headed by his National Unity Party if Netanyahu once again fails to clinch a majority to form a coalition.
“There are only two possible outcomes in this election: Either Netanyahu forms a government with Smotrich and Ben-Gvir or Gantz becomes prime minister,” said Culture and Sport Minister Chili Tropper, a confidant of Gantz.
The next government will only be formed by someone who can break up the Netanyahu bloc and unify the nation: Benny Gantz.”


Summary for jerusalem_article5.txt:
In the last polls before the March 2021 election, for example, Defense Minister Benny Gantz’s Blue and White Party was barely expected to pass the 3.25% electoral threshold.
A different internal poll last week showed that if the 3.25% threshold were not a factor, the party would receive five seats.
Many potential Bayit Yehudi voters fear that their vote will be wasted if the party does not end up passing the threshold, as the latest polls predicted.


Summary for jerusalem_article6.txt:
Ahmed al-Deek: “Until when will Israel continue to avoid fulfilling its obligations under the terms of the peace agreements signed with the Palestinians?”
“Until when will Israel continue to avoid fulfilling its obligations under the terms of the peace agreements signed with the Palestinians?” the senior PA official asked.
“This [Israeli] government was even boasting that it does not want to resume the peace process with the Palestinians,” Deek noted.


Summary for jerusalem_article7.txt:
Labor was on average the third-most-searched-for political party in the past week, though sometimes dipping into fourth place.
After that was Shas, which straddled a similar line, followed by Meretz, United Torah Judaism, Yisrael Beytenu, Habayit Hayehudi and Balad.
Fourth place went to National Unity Party leader and incumbent Defense Minister Benny Gantz, who also ranged on a daily basis between third and fifth.
After that came Labor leader and incumbent Transportation Minister Merav Michaeli, Yisrael Beytenu leader and incumbent Finance Minister Avigdor Liberman, Meretz leader Zehava Galon, Shas leader Arye Deri, Ra'am leader Mansour Abbas, Hadash-Ta'al leader Ayman Odeh, Balad leader Sami Abu Sehahadeh and Economic Party leader Yaron Zelekha, Other minor party leaders, as well as the leaders of United Torah Judaism, didn't receive any searches.


Summary for jerusalem_article8.txt:
Religious Zionist Party MK Itamar Ben-Gvir, chairman of the far-right Otzma Yehudit faction, on Sunday said he will demand to be appointed public security minister if his party becomes part of the upcoming coalition.
Opposition leader Benjamin Netanyahu, chairman of the Likud, on Sunday said: “Ben-Gvir will be a minister in the government only if I form it, and to do so, I need to be bigger than [the party of Prime Minister Yair] Lapid.”
In response, Yesh Atid said in a statement: “Ben-Gvir, a convicted terrorist who announced that he would cancel Netanyahu’s trial, now demands the Public Security Ministry.
Earlier on Sunday, a recording was published in which Ben-Gvir expressed support for a “retroactive French law,” a law that bars criminal investigations of a sitting prime minister and which Ben-Gvir wants to be enacted retroactively so it can apply to Netanyahu.
“My position is unequivocally more than [Religious Zionist Party chairman Bezalel] Smotrich,” Ben-Gvir said on the recording, referring to Smotrich’s plan for reforming the judicial system, which includes a French law that would not affect the Netanyahu trial.


Summary for jerusalem_article9.txt:
Israel Elections: Which parties are running, what are their policies?
A breakdown of the parties and their policies ahead of the Israeli election, as well as voting strategies and possible outcomes.
Housing: Issuing government bonds linked to housing prices, reducing demand; shortening the time for obtaining building permits and implementing a “retroactive enforcement” model – build first, then receive permits; land subsidies for construction for young couples and increasing the budget for supporting infrastructure before construction; a carrot and stick method with the contractors – if they own land and don’t build, they will get a stick; if they build fast, they will get a carrot.
Governance: Enact the law that prohibits a person accused of crimes from receiving the mandate to form the government, serving as president or state ombudsman.
Climate: Enact the climate law that will set a goal of carbon neutralization by 2050 and ensure the establishment of a climate council in the Prime Minister’s Office that will see to the implementation of the law.
“Restart” the judicial system, which includes canceling the crime of fraud and breach of trust; changing the makeup of the Judicial Selection Committee so that politicians have a majority; enacting a provision that enables the Knesset to legislate laws that were blocked by the High Court; enacting the French Law, which blocks any criminal proceedings against ministers.
Deportation Law: Those who throw stones and Molotov cocktails – with the aim of murdering Jews, members of the security forces and civilians, and those who publicly support terrorism against the State of Israel – will have their citizenship revoked and will be deported.
Enacting legislation to enable long-term imprisonment of illegal immigrants and a law to promote “voluntary immigration” to their original country or to a third party.
Establish a broad, stable government headed by Gantz that does not rely on the extremes on both sides of the political map and will take Israel out of the political bedlam.
Make public security a central goal and implement the Eisenkot Plan to eradicate crime, strengthen personal security, and restore governance all over the country.
Commitment to pass the law on free education from age 0.
Leader: Former MK and minister Arye Deri
Governmental stability: Enacting a law that for the first two years, a Knesset may only disperse with a majority of minimum 90 MKs. Requiring two-year budgets, and legislating laws barring a prime minister from serving while under indictment or for more than two terms.
Personal safety: A national plan to strengthen and empower the Israel Police at a cost of NIS 3 billion, which will include an addition to the current strength of 3,000 police officers.
Haredi sector: Core studies in educational institutions as a condition for government support, with external supervision that will include annual testing; forming a special program for training teachers to teach core subjects in the haredi sector; and canceling special status of haredi schools that do not teach core studies.
Enacting a national plan to help immigrants integrate into the Israeli workforce, and a law that requires adequate representation of new olim in the public sector.
Housing: An emergency national social housing plan, including state construction of hundreds of thousands of housing units; introducing affordable housing clauses in every new housing plan; eliminating the waiting list in public housing; developing models for long-term rental; and creating protection mechanisms for apartment prices and rent control.
Expanding human rights protected by Israeli law in accordance with the UN; legislation of the Basic Law: Social Rights, which will include the right to health, education, housing and a dignified existence, to unionize and to strike.
Canceling the Basic Law: Israel as the Nation-State of the Jewish People; legislation of Israel’s Declaration of Independence as a Basic Law.
Education: Gradually expand the law of free preschool education; strengthening the study of the Bible, Judaism and Israeli heritage at all age levels.
Support for the application of Israeli law to Area C, while granting citizenship or residency and self-administration, at their choice, to the tens of thousands of Arabs living in this area.
On the Jewish-Israeli Left, this would be Meretz or Labor, both of which are not far above the threshold in polls.
Among the Arab parties, both Hadash-Ta’al and Ra’am are not far above the threshold.


Summary for times_article1.txt:
Leader of the National Unity party Benny Gantz castigated opposition leader Benjamin Netanyahu in an angry outburst on the eve of Israel’s elections, calling the former prime minister a “liar” who “is incapable of saying a single true word,” and who “is endangering the State of Israel” by offering extremists power.
And we had to take down a hospital [from which enemy forces were operating] and make sure [first] that there were no patients and other people who had to be evacuated,” Gantz said of the incident, stressing that Netanyahu, prime minister at the time, knew all the details.


Summary for times_article10.txt:
Earlier this year, the IDF deployed a large number of additional troops to the West Bank, most in its north, amid a widespread anti-terror offensive following a series of Palestinian attacks that killed 19 people.


Summary for times_article2.txt:
In his address to the more than 1,200 participants at the General Assembly, which brought together Jewish leaders from across the US, Herzog noted the unparalleled contribution that American Jews have made to the State of Israel over the years.
In his address to the more than 1,200 participants at the General Assembly, which brought together Jewish leaders from across the US, Herzog noted the unparalleled contribution that American Jews have made to the State of Israel over the years.


Summary for times_article3.txt:
Hadash-Ta’al MK Ofer Cassif said Monday that he did not consider the Palestinian gunman who killed Ronen Hanania in a shooting attack near the West Bank settlement of Kiryat Araba on Saturday to be a terrorist.
Cassif’s statements followed divisive comments by Hadash-Ta’al MK Aida Touma-Sliman last week, when she referred to five slain members of a Palestinian terror group as “martyrs” and asserted that their “resistance” was a response to “the occupation.”


Summary for times_article4.txt:
A security breach in a Shas party database left all details of the 6.5 million citizens on Israel’s voter registry exposed to hackers, with personal information such as phone numbers and family connections available online, in yet another in a string of massive leaks that have plagued recent Israeli elections.
The report said that parties are supposed to destroy all the information after each election, but the Shas data appeared to include details about past voting patterns as well.


Summary for times_article5.txt:
Less than a day before polls open, Likud leader Benjamin Netanyahu said that far-right lawmaker Itamar Ben Gvir is a viable candidate for police minister if Netanyahu’s bid to reclaim the premiership is successful.
Ben Gvir on Sunday announced he would be demanding the post of public security minister, responsible for the police, if Netanyahu forms the next governing coalition.
Ben Gvir told Army Radio on Monday that he raised the issue with Netanyahu when they met last Thursday and that the Likud leader was supportive.


Summary for times_article6.txt:
The former prime minister sat down to speak with ultra-Orthodox journalists over cholent on Thursday evening, met with a controversial figure from the Breslov Hasidic community to secure his endorsement for the Shas party on Friday, and held a rally in the ultra-Orthodox city of Bnei Brak on Saturday night.
Outgoing UTJ leader MK Moshe Gafni recently denied there was widespread apathy among the ultra-Orthodox, telling JDN, a Haredi news site, that the community had “woken up in recent days,” following the Jewish holiday season and general election fatigue in Israel.
Arush, who commands the support of likely only a few thousand voters, backed Shas in the 2021 election, and Netanyahu met with the rabbi on Friday seeking to guarantee his support again for the ultra-Orthodox party.


Summary for times_article7.txt:
Yesh Atid is building an Arab voter base, but for now the party just hopes they vote
Ironically, the factor that created an opening for Yesh Atid to attract supporters like Bahouth might be the same one that threatens Arab turnout and the party’s chances of holding onto power.
“If the Joint List were still together, you wouldn’t see anyone here who is Arab,” Bahouth said, pointing to an auditorium next to a popular Tamra eatery where about 40 locals had gathered to hear Elhega and a delegation of Yesh Atid politicians speak.
That would still be a tremendous jump from the 8,000 votes Yesh Atid believes came to the party from Arab and Druze voters in 2021, according to Elhega, with Druze making up 4,200 of those votes.
While Elhega said that Yesh Atid recruited him to build out its Arab affairs section from an understanding that “Arab society is inseparable” from Israeli society, he declined to speculate on why the party, founded in 2012 by former journalist Lapid, waited 10 years to create such a role.
At the Tamra campaign event held mid-October, and countless others Yesh Atid has hosted throughout the four-month election season, Elhega said that Arab voters are most concerned with reducing crime and violence in Arab society, followed by freeing up building permits and city planning in Arab areas.


Summary for times_article8.txt:
Leader of the far-right Otzma Yehudit party MK Itamar Ben Gvir announced on Sunday night that he will demand to be appointed public security minister — which oversees the police — in coalition negotiations following the upcoming election.
Ben Gvir, who was not drafted for mandatory military service by the IDF because of his extremist activities, claimed hundreds of police officers had appealed to him in recent weeks to “save the police.” Therefore, he said at a press conference, “I intend to demand the post of public security minister in the right-wing government that, with God’s help, will be established.”


Summary for times_article9.txt:
The rapid rise of the party’s No. 2 Itamar Ben Gvir along with Religious Zionism chairman Bezalel Smotrich has been cause for concern among several of Israel’s allies.
While Blinken and Sullivan didn’t name specific lawmakers in their conversations with Herzog, it was clear that they were referring to the two Religious Zionism leaders, a US official told Axios, adding that they “expressed our anxiety to Herzog.”
Smotrich is the chairman of Religious Zionism and was seen as one of Israel’s most extremist lawmakers before Ben Gvir entered politics last year.

